Scientific Reasoning
One thing is common to all forms of science: an ultimate goal “to know.” Curiosity and inquiry are the driving
forces for the development of science. Scientists seek to understand the world and the way it operates. To do
this, they use two methods of logical thinking: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning.
Inductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general
conclusion. This type of reasoning is common in descriptive science. A life scientist such as a biologist makes
observations and records them. These data can be qualitative or quantitative, and one can supplement the raw
data with drawings, pictures, photos, or videos. From many observations, the scientist can infer conclusions
(inductions) based on evidence. Inductive reasoning involves formulating generalizations inferred from careful
observation and analyzing a large amount of data. Brain studies provide an example. In this type of research,
scientists observe many live brains while people are engaged in a specific activity, such as viewing images of
food. The scientist then predicts the part of the brain that “lights up” during this activity to be the part
controlling the response to the selected stimulus, in this case, images of food. Excess absorption of radioactive
sugar derivatives by active areas of the brain causes the various areas to “light up”. Scientists use a scanner to
observe the resultant increase in radioactivity. Then, researchers can stimulate that part of the brain to see if
similar responses result.
Deductive reasoning or deduction is the type of logic used in hypothesis-based science. In deductive
reasoning, the pattern of thinking moves in the opposite direction as compared to inductive
reasoning. Deductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that uses a general principle or law to predict
specific results. From those general principles, a scientist can deduce and predict the specific results that
would be valid as long as the general principles are valid. Studies in climate change can illustrate this type of
reasoning. For example, scientists may predict that if the climate becomes warmer in a particular region, then
the distribution of plants and animals should change.
Both types of logical thinking are related to the two main pathways of scientific study: descriptive science
and hypothesis-based science. Descriptive (or discovery) science, which is usually inductive, aims to observe,
explore, and discover, while hypothesis-based science, which is usually deductive, begins with a specific
question or problem and a potential answer or solution that one can test. The boundary between these two
forms of study is often blurred, and most scientific endeavors combine both approaches. The fuzzy boundary
becomes apparent when thinking about how easily observation can lead to specific questions. For example, a
gentleman in the 1940s observed that the burr seeds that stuck to his clothes and his dog’s fur had a tiny hook
structure. On closer inspection, he discovered that the burrs’ gripping device was more reliable than a zipper.
He eventually experimented to find the best material that acted similarly, and produced the hook-and-loop
fastener popularly known today as Velcro. Descriptive science and hypothesis-based science are in continuous
dialogue.
The Scientific Method
Biologists study the living world by posing questions about it and seeking science-based responses. Known
as scientific method, this approach is common to other sciences as well. The scientific method was used even
in ancient times, but England’s Sir Francis Bacon (1561–1626) first documented it (Figure 1.5). He set up
inductive methods for scientific inquiry. The scientific method is not used only by biologists; researchers from
almost all fields of study can apply it as a logical, rational problem-solving method.
The scientific process typically starts with an observation (often a problem to solve) that leads to a question.
Let’s think about a simple problem that starts with an observation and apply the scientific method to solve
the problem. One Monday morning, a student arrives at class and quickly discovers that the classroom is too
warm. That is an observation that also describes a problem: the classroom is too warm. The student then asks
a question: “Why is the classroom so warm?”